PART 1: Consent for the Home Office to verify application information
You (the applicant) should sign the Part 1 consent, and relevant other parties should
sign Part 2 and 3, where they are relevant to your application. You must send them
with your supporting documents If you fail to do, your application may be refused.
Where any of the information or documentation also relates to someone else (for
example a joint bank account or joint utility bill) you should ask that person or
persons to sign PART 2 of the consent form.
From the applicant
I understand that the Home Office may check whether the information and
documentation that I provide is genuine and correct.
I agree to the provider of the information and documentation telling the Home Office
whether it is genuine and/or correct or in what way(s) (if any) it is not genuine and/or
correct.
I agree to the disclosure to the Home Office of any relevant data (including personal
data) that the provider of the information or documentation holds on me for the
above purpose. If I have not supplied correct information or documentation to the
Home Office the provider may disclose my relevant correct data (including personal
data).
I understand that the information obtained may be used to decide my application and
for related purposes.
I understand that providing information or documentation that is not genuine and/or
correct will normally result in my application (or subsequent applications) being
refused and may lead to my prosecution for a criminal offence.
Name and address of applicant:
Postcode
Signature
Date
PART 2: Consent for the Home Office to verify third party information
If any information or documentation provided n is in the joint names of the applicant
and another person (or persons), the joint owner should sign the following
declaration:
The above-named person (‘the applicant’) has given the Home Office information or
documentation and agreed that the Home Office can check that such information or
documentation is genuine and/or correct. I am a joint owner with the applicant of
some or all of that information or documentation.
I understand that information about the applicant may also reveal information about
me.
I agree to the provider of the information or documentation giving the Home Office
relevant data (including personal data) that it holds about me. I understand that this
only covers data about me in my capacity as joint owner of the relevant information
with the applicant (and not about any other information it may hold about me either in
my capacity as an individual or jointly together with a third party) and is limited to:
 such relevant data as is necessary to confirm that the information or
documentation that the applicant has supplied is genuine and correct;
 if that information or documentation is not correct, relevant data relating to any
irregularities, inaccuracies or discrepancies in the information or
documentation that the applicant has provided, including as to the correct
information that the provider of the information holds.
I understand that this information or documentation may be used to make a decision
on the application and for related purposes.
Name and address of joint owner
Postcode
Signature
Date
PART 3: Consent for the Home Office to verify information from third party
sponsor
If the information or documentation relates to another person or persons who is to
provide the applicant with financial support, that person or persons* should sign the
following declaration:
I have agreed to provide financial support to the applicant as set out in the
application form. I have provided information or documentation to support the
application. I understand the Home Office may verify the information or
documentation which has been provided.
I agree to the provider of the information or documentation giving the Home Office
relevant personal data it holds about me. This is limited to that which is necessary to
confirm that the information or documentation the applicant has supplied is genuine
and correct. If that information or documentation is not genuine or correct, the
provider may give the Home Office details of any irregularities, inaccuracies or
discrepancies in the information or documentation, and may also disclose to the
Home Office the correct information that they hold.
I understand that this information or documentation may be used to decide the
application and for related purposes.
Name and address of financial sponsor
Postcode
Signature
Date
*If the account is a joint account, all owners should sign.