Unit 1: Programming
Report 2: Evaluation of IDE and Coding Standards
North Sussex Judo Club: Monthly Fee Calculator
Academic Year 2025/2026 | AQDS Junior Developer
1. Introduction
This report provides a critical evaluation of the Integrated Development Environment (IDE) used during the development of the North Sussex Judo Club monthly fee calculator, and an evaluation of the coding standards applied throughout the project. The report examines the impact of using VS Code as an IDE compared to developing without one, evaluates the debugging tools available within VS Code, and critically assesses why coding standards are essential in a professional software development environment.
2. Evaluation of the IDE: Visual Studio Code
2.1 Overview of VS Code
Visual Studio Code (VS Code) is a free, open-source IDE developed by Microsoft. It supports a wide range of programming languages through extensions and provides a comprehensive set of tools for writing, running and debugging code. For this project, VS Code was used with the Python extension, which adds syntax highlighting, linting via Pylint, IntelliSense autocomplete and integrated debugging support.
2.2 Debugging Tools Used
VS Code provides a built-in debugger that was used extensively during the development of the Judo program. The following debugging tools were particularly valuable:
2.3 Impact of VS Code on Development Quality
The use of VS Code had a significant positive impact on the quality and efficiency of the development process. The Pylint linter highlighted several issues before the program was even run, including a missing return statement in an early version of the get_weight_category() function and inconsistent indentation that would have caused an IndentationError at runtime. Catching these issues at the writing stage rather than the testing stage saved considerable debugging time.
The IntelliSense autocomplete feature reduced the likelihood of spelling errors in function names. In Python, calling a function with a misspelled name causes a NameError exception that crashes the program. By suggesting the correct function name as the developer types, VS Code prevented this class of error entirely during development.
2.4 VS Code vs Developing Without an IDE
To evaluate the value of VS Code objectively, it is useful to consider what the development process would have looked like without it. Without an IDE, the program would have been written in a basic text editor such as Notepad and run from the Windows command prompt. This approach has several significant disadvantages compared to using VS Code.
The most significant difference is in debugging. Without VS Code's debugger, the only way to understand what a program is doing at a specific point is to insert print statements throughout the code. This is time consuming, clutters the code with temporary statements that must be removed before submission, and makes it difficult to inspect multiple variables simultaneously. VS Code's breakpoints and variable watch panel provide all of this functionality instantly, making the debugging process far more efficient.
2.5 Critical Evaluation
While VS Code provided substantial benefits during this project, it is important to acknowledge its limitations. VS Code is a general-purpose editor and lacks some of the more advanced features found in dedicated Python IDEs such as PyCharm, including more sophisticated refactoring tools, built-in test runners and deeper code analysis. For a small project like the Judo fee calculator, VS Code was entirely sufficient. However, for a large-scale enterprise application with hundreds of modules and thousands of lines of code, a more specialised IDE such as PyCharm Professional might be more appropriate.
Additionally, VS Code's debugging tools require some initial setup and configuration, particularly for first-time users. A developer unfamiliar with IDEs may take time to learn how to configure the launch.json file and set up the Python interpreter correctly. Despite this initial learning curve, the long-term productivity gains of using an IDE far outweigh the setup time. The conclusion is clear: for any project beyond a trivial script, developing without an IDE is significantly less efficient and produces lower quality results.
3. Evaluation of Coding Standards
3.1 Overview of Coding Standards Applied
Throughout the development of the Judo program, PEP 8 was adopted as the primary coding standard. PEP 8 is the official style guide for Python code, providing conventions for naming, indentation, line length, spacing and commenting. In addition to PEP 8, several other coding standards were applied, including the use of docstrings for all functions, descriptive variable naming, modular function design and comprehensive input validation.
3.2 Specific Standards and Their Impact
3.3 Why Coding Standards Matter in a Team Environment
While coding standards provide benefits even for solo developers, their value multiplies significantly in a team environment. In a professional software development team, multiple developers may be working on different parts of the same codebase simultaneously. Without agreed standards, each developer would write code in their own style, making it extremely difficult for colleagues to read, review and maintain each other's work.
Consider a scenario where two developers are working on the same Python project. Developer A uses camelCase for variable names (athleteName, weeklyFee) while Developer B uses snake_case (athlete_name, weekly_fee). Developer C uses single-letter variables (n, f) for speed. When any of these developers needs to read, modify or debug another's code, the inconsistency significantly increases the time and mental effort required to understand what the code is doing. This directly increases the cost of maintaining the software.
Coding standards also play a critical role in code reviews. In professional teams, code is reviewed by colleagues before being merged into the main codebase. Without a shared standard, reviewers must spend time addressing style issues rather than focusing on logic and correctness. Tools like Pylint and Black (a Python auto-formatter) enforce coding standards automatically, allowing review time to be focused on what matters most: whether the code does the right thing correctly and efficiently.
3.4 Coding Standards and Bug Prevention
Several of the bugs encountered during development of the Judo program could have been prevented or more easily identified if stricter coding standards had been applied from the start. For example, the logic error in the weight category function (Bug 2) involved an incorrect comparison operator. If the function had been written with clearer comments explaining the expected logic for each weight boundary, the mistake would likely have been spotted during code review before it caused an incorrect result.
Input validation, which was applied as a coding standard throughout this project, prevented what would otherwise have been multiple runtime errors from crashing the program. By treating input validation as a non-negotiable standard rather than an optional addition, the program became significantly more robust. This demonstrates that coding standards are not merely aesthetic preferences but have a direct, measurable impact on software quality and reliability.
3.5 Critical Evaluation of Standards Applied
While the coding standards applied throughout this project were effective, a critical evaluation reveals areas where they could have been stronger. The program does not include unit tests, which are a core component of professional Python coding standards. Unit tests (using Python's unittest or pytest framework) would allow each function to be tested in isolation, ensuring that changes to one function do not accidentally break another. For a production system at the North Sussex Judo Club, unit tests would be essential.
Additionally, while docstrings were applied to all functions, they did not include parameter types or return type annotations, which are increasingly considered best practice in modern Python development (PEP 484). Adding type hints would make the code even more readable and would allow static analysis tools to catch type-related bugs automatically. For example:
def get_weight_category(weight: float) -> str:
 """Returns the competition weight category for the given weight."""
This is a minor improvement that would bring the code closer to professional production standards and is recommended for future development of this program.
4. Conclusion
This report has critically evaluated the use of VS Code as an IDE and the coding standards applied during the development of the North Sussex Judo Club fee calculator. VS Code provided significant productivity and quality benefits compared to developing without an IDE, particularly through its debugging tools, linting capabilities and integrated terminal. The breakpoint debugger was instrumental in identifying and resolving all three bugs encountered during development, demonstrating the practical value of IDE-based debugging over manual print statement approaches.
Coding standards, specifically PEP 8, were applied consistently throughout the project and had a measurable impact on code quality, readability and maintainability. In a team environment, these standards become even more critical, directly affecting development speed, code review efficiency and the long-term cost of software maintenance. Areas for improvement include the addition of unit tests and type annotations, both of which would bring the code to a higher professional standard.
The overall conclusion is that both IDEs and coding standards are not optional extras in professional software development — they are fundamental practices that determine the quality, reliability and maintainability of the code produced.
References
Microsoft (2024) Visual Studio Code Documentation. [online] Available at: https://code.visualstudio.com/docs [Accessed: May 2026]
Python Software Foundation (2024) PEP 8: Style Guide for Python Code. [online] Available at: https://peps.python.org/pep-0008/ [Accessed: May 2026]
Python Software Foundation (2024) PEP 484: Type Hints. [online] Available at: https://peps.python.org/pep-0484/ [Accessed: May 2026]
Real Python (2024) Python Debugging With pdb. [online] Available at: https://realpython.com/python-debugging-pdb/ [Accessed: May 2026]
Lutz, M. (2013) Learning Python. 5th edn. O'Reilly Media.
Fowler, M. (2018) Refactoring: Improving the Design of Existing Code. 2nd edn. Addison-Wesley.